{{delete}}
{{translation header
 | title    = 2 Meqabyan (The Ethiopian Maccabees)
 | author   = Unknown
 | section  = [[Translation:Bible|Free Bible]]
 | previous = [[Translation:1 Meqabyan|1 Meqabyan]]
 | next     = [[Translation:3 Meqabyan|3 Meqabyan]]
 | shortcut = 
 | year     = 
 | language = gez
 | original = 
 | notes    = 
}}

Chapter 1

[1] This is a book that tells how Meqabees found the Israelites in Mesopotamia, which is part of Syria, and killed them in that region, beginning from Jabbok all the way to the square of Jerusalem; and it tells how he destroyed the country.

[2] Because the Syrians, the Edomites, and the Amalekites were united with the Moabite man, Meqabees, who destroyed the land of Jerusalem—for they camped from Samaria to the square of Jerusalem and throughout its entire region—they killed in war, sparing no one except a few people who fled.

[3] When the children of Israel did wrong, the Lord aroused Meqabees, the man of Moab, against them, and he killed them with the sword.

[4] Because of this, the enemies of the Lord and the nations bragged over His honored country and swore by their crimes.

[5] The Philistines and the Edomites camped there; the Lord sent them because the people had been hypocritical regarding His Word, and they began to take revenge and destroy the Lord’s land.

[6] The country of Meqabees is Riemat, which is part of Moab; he arose from his country with power, and those with him also swore oaths.

[7] They camped in the region of Gilead, which is the lot of Mesopotamia up to Syria, so that they might destroy the Lord’s land. There, he begged the Amalekites and Philistines for help, giving them much silver, gold, chariots, and horses to be one with him in his crime.

[8] They came together and crushed the fortress; those who lived in it shed blood like water.

[9] They made Jerusalem like a hut in a vineyard (a temporary shelter); he made a voice heard within it and performed all the sinful works the Lord hates. They also defiled the Lord’s land, which was once filled with praise and honor.

[10] They made the flesh of your friends and the corpses of your servants food for the beasts of the wilderness and the birds of heaven.

[11] They robbed the orphans and the widows; without fearing the Lord, they acted as Satan taught them. Until the Lord, who examines the kidneys and the mind, was provoked to anger, they even ripped fetuses out of the bellies of pregnant women.

[12] They returned to their own country rejoicing because they had worked evil against the Lord’s people, taking the plunder they captured from the honored land.

[13] When they returned and entered their houses, they made celebrations, songs, and clapping.

Chapter 2

[1] The prophet called Re`ay told him this: "Rejoice today for a little while during your celebrations; but the Lord, whom Israel glorified, shall take revenge and destroy you in the punishment you did not doubt."

[2] Will you say, ‘My horses are swift, and therefore I will escape by running’?

[3] I tell you: the people who follow you are swifter than vultures. You will not escape from the Lord’s judgment and the destruction that shall come upon you.

[4] Will you say, ‘I wear iron clothes, so spears and bows cannot hurt me’? The Lord who honors Israel said: "It is not by spears that I will take revenge and destroy you." He told him, "I shall bring upon you heart sickness, itching, and rheumatism—sicknesses worse and firmer than the throw of a spear or the sting of a bow. Yet even by these things, I will not finish My revenge."

[5] "You have aroused My anger. I shall bring heart sickness upon you; you will lack anyone to help you, and you will not escape from My authority until I destroy the memory of your name from this world."

[6] "Because you hardened your mind and elevated yourself over My country, when I quickly do this thing in the blink of an eye, you will know that I was your Creator. You are before Me like grass before the wind that fire consumes, and like the dust that the wind scatters from the earth."

[7] For you have aroused My anger and did not acknowledge your Creator; I shall neglect all your kindred, and I will not spare anyone who approaches your fortress.

[8] "And now, turn away from all the sin you have committed. If you turn from your sin and seek peace in mourning and sadness before the Lord—if you beg Him with a clean mind—the Lord will forgive you all the sins you committed before Him," he told him.

[9] At that time, Meqabees wore dust and mourned before the Lord because of his sin, for the Lord was angry with him.

[10] For His eyes are revealed and He does not withhold; His ears are opened and He does not neglect. He does not make the word He spoke false, and He performs it quickly, for the Lord knew He would not hold back the punishment He spoke through the prophet’s word.

[11] He cast off his clothes, wore sackcloth, sprinkled dust on his head, and cried and wept before his Creator, the Lord, because of the sin he had committed.

Chapter 3

[1] And the prophet came from Riemat and spoke to him (for Riemat, which is part of Moab, is near Syria).

[2] He (Meqabees) dug a pit and entered it up to his neck, weeping bitter tears; he entered into repentance because of the sin he had committed before the Lord.

[3] And the Lord told the prophet: "Return from the land of Judah to Riemat, to the Moabite official Meqabees. Tell him, 'The Lord says this to you.' Tell him, 'I, the Lord your Creator, sent you by My own Will to destroy My country. Do not say, "I destroyed the honored city, Jerusalem, by the strength of my own power and the abundance of my army," for it was not you who did this thing.'"

[4] "For that city saddened Me with all its greed, treachery, and lustfulness."

[5] "I neglected and cast her away by your hand. And now, the Lord has forgiven your sin because of the children you have fathered. It is not because of you, who hardened your mind and said, 'I encircled Jerusalem by my own authority and strength.'"

[6] "As those who doubt are not disciplined enough to enter repentance, do not be a doubter; enter into repentance now, being disciplined in your entire mind."

[7] However, those who enter into repentance with their whole mind and do not return to their old desires and sins are admired among all who have repented.

[8] Those who return to their Creator, the Lord, with discipline, mourning, sadness, bowing, and many pleas are admired. For He told them: "You are My wealth, you who entered repentance after misleading others who repented."

[9] He told the arrogant Meqabees when he returned to Him in repentance after being misled: "I forgive your sin because of your fear and alarm; for I am the Lord your Creator, who brings hardship upon children for the father's sin up to seven generations if the child continues in the father's sin, but who shows mercy up to ten thousand generations for those who love Me and keep My Law."

[10] "And now I will establish My oath with you because of these children you have fathered." The Lord who rules all and honors Israel said: "I will accept the repentance you made for the sin you committed."

[11] At that time, he came out of the pit and bowed to the prophet. He swore, saying: "As I have saddened the Lord, let me do what you desire; let the Lord do so to me if I separate from you. As we had no Law, I did not live firmly in His Command like my fathers. You know that our fathers taught us to worship idols."

[12] "I am a sinner who lived firmly in my sin, in the hardness of my mind and the arrogance of my thoughts, by which I saddened the Command of the Lord. But until now, I had not heard the word of the Lord’s servants, the prophets, and I did not live by the Law and the Command He gave me."

[13] The prophet told him, "As there were none from your kindred before you who confessed their sin, I know that the Lord has received your repentance today."

[14] "But now, leave your idol worship and return to knowing the Lord so that your repentance may be true," he told him. He fell and bowed at the prophet's feet, and the prophet lifted him up and instructed him in all the good works required of him.

[15] And he returned to his house, doing exactly as the Lord commanded him.

[16] Meqabees turned his body to the worship of the Lord; he removed from his house the idols, the sorcery, the idol worshippers, the diviners, and the magicians.

[17] Morning and evening, just as the fathers do, he would examine the children he had captured and brought from Jerusalem in all the Lord’s Commands, His Order, and His Law.

[18] From the children he had captured, he appointed knowledgeable ones over his house.

[19] He also appointed knowledgeable children to teach the smaller children, showing them the bedding where they might learn the Law of the Lord that the children of Israel follow. He would hear from the captured children of Israel the Order, the Law, and the Nine Laws, realizing that the orders of the Moabites and the mosques they built were in vain.

[20] He destroyed those mosques, the idols, and the sorcery, as well as the sacrifices of goats and fattened sheep offered to idols morning and evening.

[21] He destroyed the idols he used to worship and believe in, those he sacrificed to at noon and in the afternoon, following the priests and the idols' desires.

[22] Previously, it seemed to him that they saved him in all things, and he did not scorn anything they told him.

[23] But Meqabees quit those works.

[24] After he heard the words of Ra`ay (the prophet), he completed his work in repentance. Even as the children of Israel would sadden the Lord, and then cry out to Him when He punished them with tribulation—all his people worked better deeds than the children of Israel did in that season.

[25] When the Lord heard that they were seized and abused by the nations who brought tribulation upon them, and that they cried to Him, He remembered the oath of their fathers; He would forgive them because of Isaac, Abraham, and Jacob.

[26] But when He saved them, they would forget the Lord who saved them from tribulation and return to worshipping idols.

[27] Then He would arouse nations against them to bring tribulation. When they were saddened by this, they would cry to the Lord; because He loved them as His own creation, He would be kind and forgive them.

[28] But once He protected them, they again returned to sin, saddening Him with the work of their hands and worshipping idols in their councils.

[29] So He would arouse against them the Moabites, Philistines, Syrians, Midianites, and Egyptians. When these enemies defeated them, they would cry and weep. When they were taxed and ruled over, the Lord would arouse princes for them to save them in the time He chose.

Chapter 4

[1] In the time of Joshua, there was a day when the Lord saved them.

[2] In the time of Gideon, there was a day when He saved them.

[3] In the time of Samson, and in the time of Deborah, Barak, and Judith, there were days when He saved them. Whether concerning a son or a daughter, He would raise up princes for them so they might be saved from the hands of their enemies who brought tribulation upon them.

[4] And because God loved them, He would save them from those who brought tribulation upon them.

[5] They would be totally at peace in all the work He accomplished for them; they were peaceful in their land, in their seed, and in the multiplying of all their flocks in the wilderness and their livestock.

[6] He would bless their plants and their livestock for them, for He looked upon them with an Eye of Mercy. He would not diminish their livestock, for they were the children of kind persons, and He loved them completely.

[7] But at the time they were evil in their works, He would cast them into the hands of their enemies.

[8] And when He destroyed them, they would seek Him in worship; they would return from sin and walk toward God in repentance.

[9] And when they returned with their complete reasoning, He would atone for their sins. He would not remember their former sins against them, for He knew they were flesh and blood, that they had the misleading thoughts of this world, and that they had demons in them.

[10] But when Meqabees heard of this Order that the Lord worked in His place of worship, the Temple, he was moved to repentance.

[11] After he saw and heard this, he did not scorn doing good works; he did not scorn doing all the good works that the children of Israel did when the Lord forgave them. After they trespassed against His Law, they would weep and cry when the Lord chastised them, and again He would forgive them, and they would keep His Law.

[12] Meqabees likewise straightened his works; he kept His Law, and he lived firmly in the commands of the Lord, the Creator of Israel.

[13] At that time, after he heard all the works in which the children of Israel boast, he boasted like them in keeping the Law of the Lord.

[14] He urged his kindred and children to live firmly in the commands of the Lord and all His Law.

[15] He forbade what Israel forbade, and he heard and kept the Law that Israel kept. Even though his kindred was of the people of Moab, he forbade the food that Israel forbade.

[16] He sent forth tithes; he gave the firstborn of all he owned from his cows, sheep, and donkeys. Turning his face toward Jerusalem, he offered the sacrifices that Israel sacrificed.

[17] He offered sin offerings and vow sacrifices—sacrifices by which welfare is done, peace offerings, and the continual sacrifice.

[18] He gave his first crops; he crushed and poured the grapes as Israel pours them. He gave these to the priest whom he had appointed, and likewise, he did all that Israel does, and he offered sweet incense.

[19] He built a candlestick, a bowl, a seat, a tent, and the four links of rings. He provided pure oil for the lamps of the Holy of Holies and the curtain that Israel made in the Holy of Holies when they served the Lord.

[20] Just as they did good works while they lived firmly in His Order and Law—and the Lord did not neglect them or cast them into their enemies' hands—Meqabees also did good works like them.

[21] He prayed to the Lord, the Creator of Israel, every time, that He might be his Teacher and not separate him from the children of Israel whom He chose and who kept His Covenant.

[22] Again he prayed that He might give his children a place in Zion and a house in Jerusalem—that He might give them a Heavenly Seed of Virtue in Zion and a Heavenly House of the Soul in Jerusalem—and that He might save him from the destruction spoken by the tongue of the prophets, accepting his repentance and the mourning he wept before the Lord.

[23] He prayed that the Lord would not destroy his children in this world and that He would keep him in his going out and his coming in.

[24] The kindred of the Moabite people under the authority of Meqabees were pleased to believe, for their chief lived firmly in straight works. They observed his judgment and fulfilled his covenant; they rejected their own country’s language and laws, understanding that the work of Meqabees was superior and righteous.

[25] They would come to hear the charity and truthful judgments of Meqabees.

[26] He had much wealth; he had female and male slaves, camels, and donkeys. He had five hundred horses that wore breastplates. He totally defeated the Amalekites, the Philistines, and the Syrians; yet formerly, when he worshipped idols, they defeated him.

[27] He prevailed from the time he began worshipping the Lord onward; when he went to battle, no one defeated him.

[28] His enemies would come in the power of their idols to fight him; they would call on their idols' names and curse him. However, none defeated him, for he placed his faith in the Lord, his Creator.

[29] When he did this and defeated his enemies, he ruled the people under his authority.

[30] He would take revenge and destroy the enemies of the wronged; he judged with truth for the child whose mother and father were dead.

[31] He would receive widows in their time of trouble; he gave his food to satisfy the hungry and clothed the naked with his own clothes.

[32] He was pleased with the work of his hands; he gave money without grudging and gave tithes to the Temple. Meqabees died having lived in righteousness while doing these things.

Chapter 5

[1] He died leaving his children who were small, and they grew up as their father taught them. They kept the order of their house and cared for all their kindred; they did not make the poor cry, nor the widows, nor the orphan.

[2] They feared the Lord and gave alms to the poor. They kept all the trusts their father told them. They comforted the orphans and widows in their trouble, acting as their mother and father. They rescued them from the hands of those who wronged them and calmed them from all the disturbance and sadness they found.

[3] They lived for five years while doing these things.

[4] After this, the Chaldean king, Tseerutsaydan, came. He destroyed their whole country, captured the children of Meqabees, and destroyed all their villages.

[5] He plundered all their money. The invaders lived firmly in all evil works and sin—in adultery, insult, and greed, not thinking of their Creator. Those who did not live by the Law of God and His Command, and who worshipped idols, seized them and took them to their own country.

[6] They ate what a beast had bitten, blood, and carcasses—everything that a scavenger kills and casts away, all that the Lord does not love. They had no order from the true Commands written in the Law (Torah/Oreet).

[7] They did not know the Lord their Creator, who brought them forth from their mothers' wombs and fed them what was due, and who was their Medicine.

[8] They married their aunts and their father’s wives (stepmothers); they turned to robbery, evil, sin, and adultery. They have no order in the time of Judgment. They work all evil; they marry their aunts and sisters and have no Law.

[9] All their roads are dark and slippery, and their work is sin and adultery.

[10] But the children of Meqabees kept their Order; they would not eat what a scavenger killed nor what was found dead. They would not do the works that the children of the Chaldeans did, for many of their works are evil and were not written in this book—works done by sinners, doubters, criminals, and betrayers, totally filled with robbery and sin like the children of pagans.

[11] All the works the Lord God loves were not found among them.

[12] Furthermore, they would worship an idol called Baal-Peor; they trusted it as if it were the Lord their Creator, even though it was deaf and dumb. For it is an idol that a human hand worked; it is the work of a smith who works silver and gold—it has no breath or knowledge, and it has nothing it can see or hear.

[13] It does not eat or drink.

[14] It does not kill or save.

[15] It does not plant or uproot.

[16] It does not harm its enemy or benefit its friend.

[17] It does not impoverish or honor.

[18] It is a hindrance that misleads the lazy Chaldeans; yet it does not chastise or forgive.

Chapter 6

[1] The enemy of God, Tseerutsaydan, who was arrogant, appointed priests of falsehood and vanity for his idols.

[2] He would offer sacrifices to them and pour out wine (grapes) for them.

[3] And it seemed to him as if the idols were actually eating and drinking.

[4] When dawn broke, he would give them cows, donkeys, and heifers; he offered sacrifices morning and evening, and he himself would eat from those defiled sacrifices.

[5] Furthermore, he would harass and force other people to sacrifice to his idols; it was not only he and his followers who did so.

[6] When they saw that the children of Meqabees were handsome and that they worshipped their Creator, the Lord, the idol priests desired to mislead them into offering sacrifices and eating from those hated offerings; but these honored children of Meqabees refused them.

[7] Because they kept their father’s command, remained firm in doing good works, and totally feared the Lord, they refused to agree.

[8] Consequently, the priests bound them, insulted them, and robbed them.

[9] They told King Tseerutsaydan that the children refused to sacrifice or bow down to his idols.

[10] Because of this, the king was provoked to anger; he was grieved and commanded that they be brought before him. When they stood before him, the king said to them regarding his idols, "Offer a sacrifice to my idols."

[11] But they spoke and told him, "We will not answer you in this matter, and we will not offer sacrifices to your defiled idols."

[12] He tried to terrify them with many threats, yet he was unable to overcome them, for they had disciplined their minds through faith in the Lord.

[13] He lit a fire and cast them into it, and they gave up their bodies for the Lord.

[14] After they died, they arose and appeared to him at night, drawing their swords while he reclined on his royal throne; and he was struck with total fear.

[15] He said, "My lords—tell me truly—what should I do for you? Do not take my life in death, and I will do all that you command me."

[16] They told him all that was required of him, saying, "Remember that the Lord was your Creator. It is the Lord who shall remove you from this kingdom where you are arrogant, and who shall cast you down into the Gehenna of Fire with your father, the Devil. Since we worshipped our Creator, the Lord, without iniquity and did you no wrong, yet we bowed to Him in fear of His Divinity—just as you burned us in the fire, you will also meet your end through that same fire."

[17] For He is the one who created all things: the Earth, the Heaven, the sea, and everything within them.

[18] And He is the one who created the moon, the sun, and the stars; the Lord is the author of all creation.

[19] For there is no other creator besides Him in Earth or Heaven; He is capable of all things, and nothing is impossible for Him. Since He is the one who kills and saves, who strikes with tribulation and who forgives—because we bowed to Him in fear of the Lord, yet you burned us in fire—you will finish your hardship in that same way," they told him.

[20] "As He is the one who rules Earth and Heaven, there is no one who can escape from His authority.

[21] None of the creation He made has departed from His command, except for you, who are a criminal; and criminals like you, whose reasoning has been hidden by your father Satan. You, your priests, and your idols will descend together into Gehenna, where there is no exit for all eternity.

[22] Your teacher is Satan, who taught you this evil work so that you might do evil against us; yet since it is not only you who does this, you will all descend into Gehenna together.

[23] For you make your own self like your Creator, the Lord, yet you did not know the Lord who created you.

[24] You are arrogant in your idols and the work of your hands, until the Lord makes you wretched. He shall convict you of all your sin and iniquity that you worked in this world."

Chapter 7

[1] Woe to you who do not know the Lord who created you; woe to your idols which are like you; woe to you all. You shall feel a regret that will not profit you when you are seized in the distress of Sheol (the underworld). Woe to you who do not keep His Word and His Law.

[2] You will have no exit from there for eternity—you and your priests who sacrifice to idols as if they were your Creator, the Lord. For your idols have no breath or soul; they will not take revenge or destroy those who do evil to them, nor will they do good for those who do good to them.

[3] Woe to you who sacrifice to them, for they are the work of human hands where Satan lives, dwelling there to mislead the minds of lazy ones like you, so that he might lower you into the Gehenna of Fire—both you and the priests who serve the demons commanded for you and your idols.

[4] Because you do not know that nothing will profit you, you do wrong and you err.

[5] As for the animals that the Lord created to be food for you—even dogs and beasts—they are better than you; for besides their one death, there is no further condemnation upon them.

[6] But since you will die and receive hardship in the fire of Gehenna where there is no exit for all eternity, the animals are better off than you."

[7] Having spoken this, they departed and were hidden from him.

[8] But Tseerutsaydan remained where he was, trembling and seized by a deep terror; and that fright did not leave him until dawn.

Chapter 8

[1] He lived firmly established in the malice and arrogance of his mind.

[2] And as iron is called "firm"—just as Daniel saw it regarding his kingdom—he turned against the peoples and countries in his region.

[3] He lived firmly in evil, in all his laziness, and in the harassment of people.

[4] He totally destroyed what was spoken of formerly, and he consumed the wealth of others.

[5] For he was diligent in evil, like his father the Devil who strengthened his resolve (collar of reasoning), and he destroyed what remained with his army.

[6] He said, "My era has become like the era of the Sun"—yet he did not know the Lord was his Creator.

[7] And in his mind, he thought that the Sun originated from him.

[8] He rose up in power; he camped in the portion of the Tribe of Zebulun and began a military formation in Macedonia. He received his food from Samaria, and they gave him presents from Samaria.

[9] He camped in the regions of the nomads and reached as far as Sidon; he placed a tax upon Achaia and elevated his pride (collar of reasoning) as far as the flowing sea. He returned and sent messengers as far as the Indian Sea.

[10] And likewise, he elevated his pride even unto Heaven.

[11] He lived firmly in arrogance and evil, yet he would not humble his own self.

[12] His path led toward darkness, slipperiness, crime, and arrogance; toward the shedding of blood and tribulation.

[13] All his works were what the Lord hates. He acted according to the robbery and sin taught by his teacher, the Devil; he made the orphan cry and was not kind to the poor.

[14] He defeated and destroyed the kings of peoples by his authority.

[15] He ruled over the chiefs of enemies and many peoples, and he taxed them according to his own desire.

[16] Even if he destroyed, he did not stop; there was no person from whom he did not snatch wealth, from the Tarshish sea to the Jericho sea.

[17] He would bow to idols; he would eat what was found dead, blood, and what was cut by the sword and sacrificed to idols. All his work was without justice, for he had no justice. As he was one who terrified the people under his authority, he would tax them exactly as he pleased.

[18] As he did all that he desired, there was no fear of the Lord before him; he lived in malice before the Lord who created him.

[19] He did not act like his Creator; and just as he did evil to his companion when he was angry and seized him, the Lord shall also repay him with hardship.

[20] As the Lord has said: "I shall take revenge and destroy sinful persons who do not live by My Command, so that I might destroy the mention of their name from this world." Just as He destroyed the peoples who preceded him, the Lord shall take revenge and destroy him when the time of destruction comes.

[21] And just as evil persons did evil things, they shall receive their hardship.

[22] But as commanded by the Lord, good works shall follow those who perform good works.

[23] For just as Joshua destroyed the five Canaanite kings in a cave in one day, and as he made the sun stand still in Gibeon by his prayer so that he might destroy their armies—the sun stood in the midst of heaven until he destroyed the armies of the Hivites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hittites, and Jebusites—and just as he killed twenty thousand people at one time, and as he bound them, placing his foot on their necks, and as he killed them in the cave by the spear and placed a stone over them...

[24] Tribulation like this shall find all persons who grieve the Lord with their evil works.

Chapter 9

[1] O you weak man, who are not God—why are you proud? You who are seen today as a man are earthly ashes tomorrow, and you will be nothing but worms in your grave.

[2] For your teacher is the Devil, who brings the hardship of sin back upon himself because he misled our father, Adam. Sheol will find you, as it finds all who perform your sins.

[3] Because he strengthened his pride and made himself arrogant, he refused to bow before Adam, whom the Creator had made.

[4] You also have refused to bow before your Creator, the Lord, just as your teacher the Devil did.

[5] Like your ancestors before you, who did not know their Creator in worship and went toward Gehenna, you also will go toward Gehenna.

[6] Just as He took revenge and destroyed them because of the evil works they did in this world, and as they descended into Gehenna…

[7] You also will descend into Gehenna just like them.

[8] Since you have aroused His anger and neglected to worship the Lord who gave you authority over the five kingdoms, do you think you will escape from the Lord’s authority?

[9] You do not act according to His Will, and so He examines you. But if you do good works in this world, the Lord will accomplish all your work for you; He will complete and bless all the work you take into your hands. He will subject your ancient enemies and your present enemies to you.

[10] You will be at peace in your coming and going, in the children born of your nature, in your flocks, in your wealth, and in all work where you place your hand and all thoughts of your heart. As authority has been given to you from the Lord, all that you work, plant, or demolish will be commanded for you.

[11] However, if you will not hear the Word of the Lord nor live firmly in His Law—like the criminals who preceded you, who did not worship the Lord as is due and did not believe in His righteous Law—there is nothing by which you will escape the Lord’s authority, for the Lord’s judgment is Truth.

[12] All is totally revealed before Him; nothing is hidden from His sight.

[13] He is the one who takes away the authority of kings and overturns the thrones of the powerful.

[14] He is the one who elevates those who were brought low and lifts up those who have fallen.

[15] He is the one who looses the bound and raises the dead. As the dew of pardon is found with Him, in the time He chooses, He shall raise those whose flesh was destroyed and rotten and turned to dust.

[16] Having raised and judged those who worked evil, He will take them toward Gehenna, for they have grieved Him.

[17] For they are those who destroyed the Lord’s Order and His Law, and He will destroy their children from this world.

[18] As the work of kind persons is more difficult than the work of sinners, sinners do not love to live by the counsel of the righteous.

[19] As the Heavens are distant from the Earth, so is the work of the righteous distant from the work of evil persons.

[20] The work of sinners is robbery, sin, adultery, iniquity, greed, and treachery; it is being drunk on iniquity and stealing a person's money.

[21] It is the rushing toward the shedding of blood and toward useless destruction; it is making the orphan weep. It is the eating of blood, of animals found dead, and the flesh of camels and boars. It is going toward a woman in her blood before she is cleansed, or toward a woman in childbirth.

[22] All this is the work of sinners; it is the trap of Satan, a wide and prepared path that leads toward the eternal Gehenna and toward Sheol.

[23] But the path of the righteous is totally narrow; it leads toward welfare, innocence, humility, unity, and love. It involves prayer, fasting, and purity of the flesh; keeping away from what is useless, from eating what is strangled or found dead, and from adultery with another man’s wife.

[24] They keep from what was not commanded by the Law, from eating disgusting food, and from all hated works that the Lord does not love, for sinners do all these things.

[25] As for the righteous, they distance themselves from all works that the Lord does not love.

[26] He loves them and shall keep them from all their tribulation, guarding them like precious trust money.

[27] For they keep His Order and His Law and all that He loves; but Satan rules the sinners.

Chapter 10

[1] Fear the Lord who created you and kept you until today; and you, the nobles and the kings, do not walk on the path of Satan.

[2] Live in the Law and Command of the Lord who rules all; do not walk on the path of Satan.

[3] As in the time when the children of Israel came toward Amalek to inherit the country of the Hittites, Canaanites, and Perizzites—Balak the son of Zippor and Balaam...

[4] "Whom you curse is cursed, and whom you bless is blessed." Do not go on Satan’s road, for he has said, "I will give you much silver and gold to honor you, so that you might curse them for me, and having cursed them, destroy them for me."

[5] For Balaam came making his reward for sorcery a motivation, and Balak the son of Zippor showed him the place where the children of Israel camped.

[6] For he performed his pessimism (divinations), offered his sacrifices, and slaughtered his fattened cows and sheep; for he desired to curse and destroy the children of Israel.

[7] But the curse was returned as a blessing; since the Lord did not wish for him to curse them by His Word, do not walk on the path of Satan.

[8] "As you are the people the Lord chose, as you are the Lord’s Dwelling that shall come from Heaven, let those who curse you be cursed, and let those who bless you be blessed," he said.

[9] When he blessed them, Balak the son of Zippor was grieved and angry, and he commanded him again to curse them.

[10] For the people whom the Lord blessed had come to this country, and Balaam told him, "I will not curse Israel, whom the Lord has blessed."

[11] Balak said to Balaam, "I desired that you would curse them for me, but you blessed them before me. If you had cursed them and asked me to give to you, I would have given you a house full of silver and gold. But you blessed them completely; you did nothing good for me, so I will do nothing good for you."

[12] Balaam said, "What the Lord tells me to speak with my tongue, I will speak; for I cannot dare to ignore the things of the Lord.

[13] I will not curse a blessed people, for the Lord shall be angry with me if I love money. I do not love money more than my soul.

[14] As the Lord told their father Jacob: 'Let those who bless you be blessed and those who curse you be cursed.' I will not curse the blessed Jacob; I do not love money more than my soul," he said. And as the Lord told him: "He who blesses you is blessed..."

[15] "...and a person who curses you unjustly is cursed." Complete your path and your work so that the Lord might love you.

[16] Do not be like those of old who grieved the Lord in their sin and whom He neglected—some of whom He destroyed in the Waters of Destruction (The Flood).

[17] There are those whom He destroyed by the hands of their haters and enemies—evil persons who brought tribulation upon them, capturing their lords, priests, and prophets.

[18] They delivered them to a foreign country they did not know; they captured them, plundered their livestock, and destroyed their land.

[19] For they demolished the walls and ramparts of the honored city, Jerusalem, and they made Jerusalem like a plowed field.

[20] The priests were captured, the Law was demolished, and warriors fell in battle.

[21] The widows were captured; as they were taken, they wept for themselves, yet they did not weep for their dead husbands.

[22] The children wept and the elders were shamed; they showed no mercy to the grey-haired or the aged.

[23] They destroyed all they found in the country; they showed no mercy for beauty or for those in the Law. As the Lord was angry with His people, He permitted His Dwelling, the Temple, to be destroyed beforehand, and they were captured and taken to unknown countries and peoples.

[24] Because they grieved their Creator constantly, the Lord neglected the children of Israel and allowed Jerusalem to be plowed like a field.

[25] He is kind to them because of their fathers, but He did not destroy them all at once. Because He loved their fathers Isaac, Abraham, and Jacob—who reigned truly and lived firmly in the straight Law before their Creator—it is because of the fathers' kindness, and not their own, that He forgives them.

[26] And He appointed them to a twofold honor; they found two Kingdoms: on Earth and in Heaven.

[27] And you, the kings and nobles who live in this passing world: just as your fathers who lived firmly in the required work and preceded you inherited the Kingdom of Heaven—and as their names are beautiful to their children's children—think of them.

[28] And you, straighten your work, that He might straighten your Kingdom for you, and that your name might be remembered in a goodly way, like the righteous kings who preceded you and served the Lord with their beautiful lifestyles.

Chapter 11

[1] Think of the Lord’s servant Moses, who was not angered when he kept this people in his humility and prayer, so that not even one person was destroyed. He prayed to the Lord in his innocence for his sister and brother who spoke against him and whom the Lord wished to destroy, saying: "As they have wronged You, O Lord, pardon and do not neglect Your people." He atoned for their sin, for He remembered Moses, who was not annoyed.

[2] "For I have wronged You; forgive me Your servant who am a sinner, for You are Merciful and a Pardoner; forgive them their sin."

[3] And Moses likewise atoned for the sin of his sister and brother who spoke against him.

[4] Because of this, he was called innocent.

[5] The Lord loved him more than all the priests who were his brothers; for He appointed the priests, but the Lord made Moses like Himself among them.

[6] But He also sank into the Earth the children of Korah who challenged him; He lowered them into Sheol with their livestock and tents when they said, "We are here in flesh and soul." As the Lord loved Moses and as he did not depart from His Command, every word he spoke was done as if it were the Word of the Lord.

[7] Unless you also destroy the Command of the Lord, the Lord will fulfill your desires, love your affairs, and keep your Kingdom for you.

[8] Asaph and the children of Korah who departed from Moses' command grumbled against him because he told them, "Straighten your thoughts to be ruled by the Lord."

[9] They grumbled, saying, "Are we not also children of Levi who perform the work of the priesthood in the special Tent?"

[10] They went and offered incense, taking their censers to burn it; but the Lord did not accept their plea. They were burnt by the fire in their censers and melted like wax in a fire; not one of them remained. As it was said: their censers were honored by their bodies being burnt, but apart from the censers that entered the Lord’s Dwelling by His command, neither their clothes nor their bones remained.

[11] Because of this, the Lord told Aaron and Moses: "Gather those censers toward the Tent; let them be an instrument for My Dwelling, for which I have prepared everything from the outside to the inside."

[12] And he prepared the honored instruments of the Tent; he prepared the rings, the joiners, and the sea with the image of the Cherubim.

[13] He made the cups, the curtains, the grounds of the Tent for mobilization, the altar, and the jugs used for sacrifice in the special Tent.

[14] They offered the sacrifices according to their agreement—the welfare offerings, the sin offerings, the vow offerings, and the morning and evening sacrifices.

[15] All that He commanded Moses, he commanded them to perform in the special Tent.

[16] They did not scorn being ruled by their Creator, the Lord, so that His Name might be praised by them in the Tent of the Law of the Lord, who promised to give them the inheritance of their fathers—a land flowing with honey and milk—which He swore to Abraham.

[17] They did not scorn being ruled by their Creator, who swore to Isaac and established His worship for Jacob...

[18] ...and who established for Aaron and Moses the Tent where His worship is kept...

[19] ...and who established His worship for both Elijah and Samuel in the Temple and Tent that Solomon built, until it became the Dwelling of the Lord in Jerusalem—the place that honored Israel.

[20] For the Temple is a place of supplication and atonement for sin for those who live in innocence and for the priests.

[21] It is a place for those who do His Will, where He will hear their pleas...

[22] ...and the construction of the Law of the Lord that honored Israel.

[23] It is where sacrifices are offered and incense is burned, so that the Lord who honored Israel might be in a good fragrance.

[24] He would speak from the mercy seat (joiner) where He forgives in the special Tent; the Light of the Lord would be revealed to the children of Jacob whom He chose and to friends who live firmly in His Law and Command.

[25] But those who ignored the Law of the Lord will be like the children of Korah whom the Earth swallowed; likewise, sinners shall enter Gehenna, which has no exit for all eternity.

Chapter 12

[1] Woe to you who did not keep the Law He commanded you in the Tent; woe to you nobles of Israel who did not do His Will, but followed your own will—which is arrogance, pride, greed, adultery, drinking, drunkenness, and swearing lies.

[2] Because of this, My anger is kindled. Like chaff is burnt before a fire, and like fire burns the mountain, and like a whirlwind blows away the crushed chaff from the Earth and scatters it toward Heaven until no trace is found in its place—My anger will destroy you like that.

[3] The Lord who honored Israel said: "I shall likewise destroy all persons who work sin." Think of the Lord who rules all and for whom nothing is impossible.

[4] He loves those who love Him; and for those who live firmly in His Command, He will atone for their iniquity and their sin. Do not be dull or stingy of heart by not believing.

[5] Make your reasoning straight to be ruled by the Lord, and believe in Him so that you may strengthen your bodies; and I shall save you from the hand of your enemy in your day of tribulation.

[6] In your time of prayer, I tell you: Look, I am there with you in support. I shall save you from your enemy's hand. Because you have believed in Me, and because you have done My Command, and because you did not depart from My Law, and because you loved what I love—the Lord who rules all said: "I will not neglect you on your day of tribulation."

[7] He loves those who love Him, for He is a Pardoner and He is kind; He keeps those who keep His Law like a precious trust.

[8] He holds back His anger many times; because He knows they are flesh and blood and because He is a Pardoner, He did not destroy them all in His chastisement. When their souls are separated from their flesh, they shall return to their earthliness.

[9] As He created them, bringing them from non-existence to life, they will not know the place where they live until the Lord chooses to bring them again from non-existence to life. Again He separated their souls from their flesh, and the nature of the Earth returned to its earthliness.

[10] And again, His Will shall bring them from non-existence to life."

[11] But Tseerutsaydan, who denied the Lord, increased his arrogance before the Lord; he made himself lofty until the day he died and left this world.

[12] He said, "My era has become like the era of Heaven; I am the one who sends forth the Sun, and I shall not die for eternity."

[13] Before he finished speaking this, the Angel of Death, whose name is Thilimyakos, descended and struck his heart. He died in that very hour. Because he did not praise his Creator, he was separated from his beautiful lifestyle and perished because of his great arrogance and evil works.

[14] When the army of the Chaldean king had camped in the city and country squares wishing to fight him, they found he was dead. They proceeded to destroy his country and plundered all his livestock; they did not spare the elders who were near the walls.

[15] They plundered all his wealth, took even his small money, burned his country with fire, and returned to their own land.

Chapter 13

[1] But these five children of Meqabees, who believed, gave their bodies to death, refusing to eat the sacrifice offered to idols.

[2] For they knew that to be upright with God surpasses being upright with men, and God's anger is greater than the king's anger.

[3] Knowing that this world will totally pass away and that its pleasures will not last forever, they gave their bodies to the fire so they might be saved from the fire in Heaven.

[4] As they knew that being righteous in the Garden (Paradise) for one day is better than living many eras in this world—and that finding Your pardon for one hour, O Lord, is better than many eras—they gave their bodies to the fire.

[5] What is our era? It is like a shadow, or like passing wax that melts and perishes at the edge of a fire; is it not like that?

[6] But You, Lord, live forever; Your era is never fulfilled, and the mention of Your Name is for generations to come.

[7] The children of Meqabees thought on all this; refusing to eat a disgusting sacrifice, they chose to believe in the Lord.

[8] Knowing they would arise with the dead, and acting because of the Lord—knowing that Judgment shall be judged after the Resurrection of the Council—for this reason they gave their bodies to martyrdom.

[9] You people who do not know or believe that the dead will rise—know that the Life they find later will surpass this passing earthly life. Because these five children of Meqabees together gave their bodies to death, and because their appearance was handsome, afterward they knew the Resurrection.

[10] Because they believed in Him, knowing all shall pass, and because they did not bow to idols or eat a disgusting sacrifice that gives no support, they gave their bodies to death to find thanks from the Lord.

[11] Because they knew He would make them righteous in flesh and soul in a later era, they did not consider this world's flavor or the tribulation of death a serious thing, even for those who had children and wives. Knowing the Resurrection would be in flesh and soul on the Day of Advent, they gave their bodies to death.

[12] And knowing that those who kept the Lord's Law—along with the nobles and kings who believed the Lord's Word and were kind—

[13] shall live reigning for generations for many eras in the Kingdom of Heaven, where there is no sadness, tribulation, or death. Knowing in their reasoning what would be done later—how the world melts like wax in a fire—for this reason they gave their bodies to death.

[14] Believing that their faces would shine seven times brighter than the Sun, and that they would be joyful in His love when all arise in flesh and soul, they gave their bodies to death.

Chapter 14

[1] But the beliefs of the Samaritans and the Jews—the Sadducees who do not believe the dead will rise, and the Pharisees—totally sadden me and trouble my reasoning. "We will die tomorrow," the Jews say. "Let us eat and drink, for we will die tomorrow; there is no peace we will see in the grave."

[2] The Samaritans say, "As our flesh will become dust, it won't arise."

[3] Because the soul was invisible like the wind or a distant voice—look, it is here—and because it was what they call invisible, they say the soul won't arise if the flesh is dead. They say, "When the Resurrection is done, then we will believe our souls are rising."

[4] But as beasts and worms will eat the flesh in the grave, our flesh is seen by all; it will become dust and ashes.

[5] "Those beasts who ate the flesh will become dust, for they have been like grass; they become dust as if they were never created, and their trace won't be found; so our flesh won't arise."

[6] And the Pharisees say, "We believe the dead will rise; however, He will bring and unite souls with another flesh that is in Heaven, not on Earth. For where will the destroyed and rotten flesh be found?"

[7] But the Sadducees say, "After our soul has left our flesh, we won't arise with the dead; flesh and soul have no rising after they die."

[8] Because of this, they are totally in error, and as they speak insults against the Lord's Divinity, their beliefs sadden me.

[9] As they did not believe the Lord who honors them, they have no hope of being saved; they have no hope of dying, rising, and being saved.

[10] O Jew who is blind in reasoning—when you were created from non-existence to life, even when scorned like spit—will you make the Lord ignorant, He who made you a person? Will the Lord who created you in His Image and Appearance fail to arouse and unite your flesh and soul?

[11] Since you won't escape the Lord's authority, do not think such a thing; you will arise whether you wish to or not. For there is hardship you will receive in Sheol where you were seized when you died, and you shall be judged whether you wish it or not.

[12] For the sin found in demons, which demons place in your reasoning, is worked with you after you were born from your mother's womb, and it is worked abundantly as you grow up.

[13] They place it in your body when you die, and it will bring hardship upon them for having worked it.

[14] Just as there is sin in their mind, there are people who work sin being seized by it; their kind will be presented to demons.

[15] All sinners' souls shall come from the edge of Heaven where they are, and your sin likewise shall introduce you to Gehenna, pulling and bringing your soul from where it is.

[16] After your flesh has lived separate from your soul, the Lord's dew of charity shall arouse you, being seven-fold like the flesh of our father Adam.

[17] You who live in the grave, you also err in your error; let it not seem to you that you only mislead others. You say, "The resurrection of the dead is not real," so that they might depart from the Lord's Command and err.

[18] He shall arouse you so He might give you your hardship according to the work you performed. Who will allow you to remain as dust?

[19] At that time—whether your nature be wind in wind, or water in water, or earth in earth, or fire in fire—it shall come.

[20] And if a soul that dwelt in you is what lived in Sheol, she shall come.

[21] And the souls of the righteous that live in the Garden in glory shall come.

[22] But you—Jew, Samaritan, Pharisee, Sadducee—will live in Sheol until you are judged.

[23] At that time you will see that the Lord shall pay you hardship according to your sin because you misled people.

[24] Saying, "The dead won't arise; since we will die, let us eat and drink"—and because you sat in Moses' seat and misled others by your words—you will see that He shall pay you your hardship.

[25] Without knowing the Law (Torah), you taught the words of the books; because of this you erred. It would be better had you remained without learning than to mislead a person.

[26] It would have been better if you didn't know the word of the books, while you lead the Lord's people astray with your evil teaching and worthless words.

[27] For the Lord does not show favoritism; He shall give the grace and glory He prepared for His friends—those who teach good works—but you shall receive your reward according to your work and the things you spoke.

[28] There is nothing by which you will escape the authority of the Lord who shall judge you; He will pay you according to your work, for you and those you taught together will receive a sentence.

[29] Know that the dead shall arise; and if they are people who kept His Law, they shall arise. Just as the Earth sends forth grass when the rain falls, His Command shall send them forth from the grave; it is not possible for it to remain destroyed and rotten.

[30] As moist wood drinks dew and sends forth leaves when He satisfies the Earth with rain—as wheat bears fruit and grain produces buds—it is not possible to withhold the fruit if the Lord wills it...

[31] ...and as it is not possible for a woman who has conceived to close and prevent her womb when labor seizes her—as she cannot escape without giving birth...

[32] ...as dew has descended upon her being commanded by the Lord, she shall produce them all at once. After hearing the Lord's Word, a grave likewise cannot prevent the persons gathered within it from arising.

[33] Flesh shall be gathered in the place where the corpses fell; the places where souls live shall be opened; and souls shall return to the flesh from which they were formerly separated.

[34] When a drum is beaten, the dead shall quickly arise in the blink of an eye. Having arisen, they shall stand before the Lord, and He shall give them their reward according to the work of their hands.

[35] At that time you will see that you arise with the dead, and you will marvel at all the work you did in this world. When you see all your sins written before you, you will feel a useless regret.

[36] You know that you will arise with the dead and that you will receive your hardship according to the work you performed.

Chapter 15

[1] But those who have found their reward through their good works shall be joyful at that time. Those who ignored the truth, saying, "The dead will not rise," shall be sad in the hour they see that the dead have indeed arisen with their own useless, evil works.

[2] The works they performed shall convict them; they themselves will know they are convicted without a single person needing to argue against them.

[3] On the day when judgment and mourning are done—on the day when the Lord shall come, and the Final Judgment is decreed—those who forgot the Law of the Lord shall stand in their place.

[4] On the day of total darkness and thick mist, the day when flashes of light are seen and lightning is heard...

[5] ...and on the day of earthquakes, terror, heatwaves, and freezing frost...

[6] ...on the day when the evil person who did evil receives hardship, and the clean person who did clean work receives their reward, and those who forgot the Law of the Lord receive the hardship due to a sinner—they shall all stand in their appointed places.

[7] For on that day, a master will not be more honored than his slave; a mistress will not be more honored than her servant...

[8] ...the king will not be more honored than the poor man; the elder will not be more honored than the infant; the father will not be more honored than his child, and the mother will not be more honored than her child...

[9] ...the wealthy will not be more honored than the poor; the arrogant will not be more honored than the humble; the great will not be more honored than the small. That is the day when judgment is judged; the day they receive their sentence and hardship, and the day all shall receive hardship according to their sins.

[10] It is the day when those who did good works receive their reward, and those who sinned receive hardship.

[11] As it is the day when the rewarded are made joyful, those who forgot the Law of the Lord shall stand in their place. Those who acted as liars, who misinterpreted the books while saying, "The dead will not rise"—they shall behold the Resurrection.

[12] At that time, the sinners of this world, who did no good works, shall weep over the sins they committed, for sadness has found them without any comfort.

[13] Likewise, the righteous who did good works—their joy shall never end, for they did good works while they were in this world.

[14] For they knew they would arise after they died, and they did not depart from the Law of their Creator.

[15] Because they did not depart from His Law, they shall inherit two blessings: He multiplied their seed in this world and He honored their children.

[16] He bequeathed to them the Kingdom of Heaven, where the welfare He swore to their fathers shall be found in the hour the dead arise and the rich become poor.

[17] Those who worked sin, who did not believe the dead would rise, who did not keep the Law of the Lord, and who did not think of the Day of Rising, shall weep.

[18] At that time, they will see the tribulation that finds them, which shall have no end; where there is no comfort or welfare, only a sadness in their minds that knows no rest.

[19] A fire that does not perish and worms that do not sleep shall find them.

[20] In the place where their flesh is, fire, sulphur, whirlwinds, frost, hail, and sleet shall rain over them.

[21] For those who do not believe the dead will rise, there is the fire of Gehenna upon them.

Chapter 16

[1] Please, consider your own body: your toenails, your fingernails, and the hair on your head—how they grow back quickly after you cut them. Know the Resurrection by this; for you have reasoning, religion, and knowledge.

[2] Regarding your nails and your hair, do you ask, "Where do these come from?" Is it not the Lord who prepared them to grow? Recognize the rising that shall happen to your own flesh—not another's flesh—so that you may know you will arise after you die.

[3] Because you misled people by saying, "There is no Resurrection of the dead," when the dead arise, you will receive your hardship according to your sins and iniquity.

[4] Just as the seed you plant now will not refuse to grow—whether it be wheat or barley—you will see this truth in the hour your hardship arrives.

[5] Furthermore, the plant you sow does not say, "I will not grow." Whether it is a fig tree or a grapevine, its fruit and leaves do not change their nature.

[6] If you plant grapes, they do not change into figs; if you plant figs, they do not change into grapes; if you sow wheat, it does not change into barley.

[7] Every seed, according to its kind—every fruit, every wood, every leaf, and every root—sends forth fruit, having received the blessing of the Dew of Pardon from the Lord. If you sow barley, it will not change into wheat.

[8] Likewise, as a grave produces flesh and soul, it shall produce persons exactly as the Lord sowed them within it. The flesh and soul the Lord sowed shall arise united. Those who did good works will not be changed into those who did evil, and those who did evil will not be changed into those who did good.

[10] In the hour when the drum is beaten, the dead shall arise by the Dew of Pardon found from the Lord. Those who did good works shall arise to the Resurrection of Life; their reward is the Garden of Joy that the Lord prepared for the righteous, where there is no tribulation or disease, and which is the dwelling of the clean who will never die again.

[11] But those who did evil works shall arise to the Resurrection of Final Judgment, along with the Devil who misled them...

[12] ...and with his armies—demons who do not love even one of Adam’s children to be saved.

[13] They shall descend to the edge of the darkness of Gehenna, where there is grinding of teeth and mourning; where there is no mercy or pardon, and no exit for all eternity. It is beneath Sheol forever. For they did no good works during their lives in this world while they were in the flesh.

[14] Because of this, they shall be judged in the hour that flesh and soul arise united.

[15] Woe to those who do not believe in the rising of flesh and soul, through which the Lord shows the abundance of His miracles. Everyone shall receive their reward according to their work and the labor of their hands.

Chapter 17

[1] A wheat kernel will not grow or bear fruit unless it is first broken down (destroyed). But if a wheat kernel is broken down, it sends roots into the Earth, sends forth leaves, produces buds, and bears fruit.

[2] You know that a single wheat kernel becomes many kernels.

[3] Likewise, this kernel grows by rising up from water, wind, and the dew of the Earth. Wheat cannot bear fruit without the Sun, and the Sun serves in the place of fire.

[4] The wind serves in the place of a soul—for wheat cannot bear fruit without wind—and the water gives the Earth drink to satisfy it.

[5] After the Earth, which is ashes, drinks the water, it produces roots, and its tips grow high. It bears fruit according to how the Lord blessed it.

[6] A wheat kernel is an example of Adam, in whom dwells a living soul created by the Lord. Likewise, a grapevine drinks water and sends forth roots.

[7] The Dew of Pardon from the Lord gives drink to the long tips of the vines, sending water upward to the leaves. It buds from the heat of the Sun, and by the Will of the Lord, it bears fruit.

[8] It produces a good fragrance that makes the mind joyful. When eaten, it satisfies like water that quenches thirst or grain that satisfies hunger. When pressed, it becomes the blood of the cluster.

[9] As it is said in the Psalms: "Wine makes a person's heart glad." When they drink it, it makes the heart joyful. When a person opens his mouth and drinks, he is filled, and the blood flows toward his heart.

[10] Because the drunkenness of grapes can mislead and deprive a man of his mind, it makes pits and cliffs seem like wide meadows; he does not notice the obstacles or thorns against his feet and hands.

[11] The Lord did this with the fruit and the vine so that His Name might be praised by those who believe the dead will rise and who do His Will.

[12] In the Kingdom of Heaven, He shall make those who believe in the Resurrection joyful.

Chapter 18

[1] You people who do not believe the dead will rise—how great is your error! When you are taken to the place you do not know, you will feel useless regrets. Because you did not believe in the rising where the dead arise united in soul and flesh, and when you are cast into Gehenna...

[2] whether you did good or evil, you will receive your reward according to your work. For you misled the minds of your companions by saying, "We know that the dead, who are dust and ashes, will not rise."

[3] Since their death has no exit, and since they have no power against the chastisement that shall come upon them, and since they were not firm in their tribulation—for this reason they misled their companions. They shall all stand in the Lord's Square.

[4] When He is angry with them in His wrath, they will be struck with total fear. Because they did not acknowledge they were created from non-existence to life, and because they spoke of the Lord's Law without understanding, they shall all be judged because they did evil.

[5] They do not know the Gehenna to which they will go. Because they were angry and crooked in their work, they taught their companions according to their own thirsty reasoning. They are evil ones who teach a crooked thing, saying, "There is no Resurrection of the dead."

[6] At that time, they shall know that the dead will rise, and they shall know they are judged because they did not believe in the Resurrection that is for all of Adam's children.

[7] For we are all Adam's children, and we have died because of Adam; the judgment of death has found us all from the Lord because of the error of our father, Adam.

[8] We will again arise there with our father Adam to receive our hardship according to the works we performed; for the world has been ruled by death because of Adam’s ignorance.

[9] Because Adam infringed upon the Lord's Command, we received hardship. Our flesh melted like wax in the grave, and our bodies perished.

[10] The Earth drank our marrow; we perished, and our beauty perished in the grave. Our flesh was buried, and our beautiful words were buried in the Earth.

[11] Worms came from our shining eyes; our features perished in the grave and became dust.

[12] Where is the beauty of the youth, who were attractive, whose stance was handsome, and whose words were successful? Where is the strength of the warriors?

[13] Where are the kings' armies, or the lordship of the nobles? Where is the adornment of horses, the silver and gold, and the shining weapons? Did they not all perish?

[14] Where is the sweet drink of the vine, or the flavor of food?

Chapter 19

[1] O Earth, who has gathered the nobles, the kings, the rich, the elders, the attractive daughters, and the beautiful ones—woe arises from you.

[2] O Earth, who gathered the warriors, the comely, those with fine limbs, those with reasoning and knowledge, and those whose words were as beautiful as a humming harp, a lyre, or the beat of a violin...

[3] ...and those who had a tune that brought joy like wine, and those whose eyes shone like the morning star...

[4] ...and those who sketched with firm right hands, those who lifted up what was given or withheld, those whose feet were beautiful to behold, and those who ran like rushing wheels—woe arises from you.

[5] O Death, who separated the souls of attractive persons from their flesh—woe arises from you, though you were sent by the Will of the Lord.

[6] As you have gathered many people whom the Lord produced from you and returned to you—O Earth, woe arises from you. We were found from you, we returned to you by the Will of the Lord, and we were joyful upon you by the Will of the Lord.

[7] You became a carpet for our corpses; we walked upon you, and we were buried within you. We ate your fruit, and you ate our flesh.

[8] We drank the water from your springs, and you drank our springs of blood. We ate the fruit of your earthliness, and you ate the flesh of our bodies.

[9] Just as the Lord commanded you to be our food, we ate grain from your earth that holds the beautiful dew; and you received the beauty of our flesh and turned it to dust for your food, just as the Lord commanded you.

[10] O Death, who gathered the powerful nobles and kings—woe arises from you. You did not fear their fame or their terror, acting as the Lord who created them commanded you. O Death, woe arises from you; you did not overlook the sufferer.

[11] You were not merciful to those with beautiful features; you did not spare the powerful or the warriors. You did not spare the poor or the rich, the kind or the evil, the children or the elders, the daughters or the sons.

[12] You did not spare those who thought of good things and did not depart from the Law, nor did you spare those who were like animals in their works, who thought of evil, yet were beautiful in their features, their lifestyle, and their words. O Death, woe arises from you.

[13] You did not spare those whose words were angry and whose mouths were full of curses. You gathered those who live in darkness and in light, and their souls are in your places. O Death, woe arises from you.

[14] And the Earth gathered the flesh of all who lived, whether in caves or in the ground, until the drum is beaten and the dead arise.

[15] As the dead shall arise quickly, in the blink of an eye, by the Lord’s Command when the drum is beaten—those who did evil works shall receive hardship according to the measure of their sins, and those who did good works shall be joyful.

Chapter 20

[1] Believe me, all the work we did in this world will not remain hidden when we stand before Him in fear and trembling.

[2] In the hour when we have no provisions for our path and no clothes for our bodies...

[3] ...in the hour when we have no staff for our hands or shoes for our feet...

[4] ...and in the hour when we do not know the paths where the demons take us—whether it be slippery or smooth, dark, filled with thorns or nettles, or a depth of water or a pit—believe me, the works we did in this world will not remain hidden.

[5] We will not know the demons who take us, nor will we hear their words.

[6] As they are black ones and lead us toward darkness, we will not see their faces.

[7] As the prophet spoke, saying: "In the hour my soul was separated from my flesh—Lord, my Lord, You know my path. They hid a trap on the path where I went, and I looked to return to the right, but I lacked anyone who knew me; I have nothing there by which I will escape." As they take us toward darkness, we will not see their faces.

[8] Because he knows the demons ridicule him and will lead him toward a path he does not know, he speaks this. If he turns left or right, there is no one who knows him.

[9] He is alone among demons, and there is no one who knows him.

[10] Angels of Light, who are subtle, are sent to the righteous to receive their souls and take them toward a place of Light—toward the Garden where welfare is found.

[11] Demons and Angels of Darkness are sent to receive the sinners and take them toward Gehenna, which was prepared for them to receive hardship for the sins they committed.

[12] Woe to the souls of sinners who are taken toward destruction, who have no welfare or rest, no escape from the tribulation that finds them, and no departure from Gehenna for all eternity.

[13] Because they lived firmly in the work of Cain, perished by the price of Balaam’s iniquity, and lacked a plan—woe to the sinners. For their excuse was to receive interest and gifts, and in their transgression, they took a foreigner’s money that was not their own.

[14] They shall receive their hardship in Gehenna for the sins they committed.

Chapter 21

[1] Where are those who gather the money of a foreigner, which was not the work of their hands nor their own money?

[2] For they took a person's money for nothing; they shall be gathered without knowing the day of death that will arrive for them, and they will leave their money to a stranger.

[3] Like their fathers, they are a kindred of sinners who worry and seize other sinners, whether by theft or robbery; and their children will not find joy in their fathers' money.

[4] Because they gathered it in transgression, it is like misty urine, or like smoke scattered by the wind, or like wilting grass, or like wax melting before a fire. As the glory of sinners shall perish like that, their fathers' money will benefit no one. As David spoke, saying: "I saw a sinful man...

[5] ...being honored and famous like a cordia or a cypress tree; but when I returned, he was gone. I searched and did not find his place." There is no one whom their fathers' money will profit or benefit.

[6] Because they gathered money through transgression, it seemed to them they would not die. Just as those who wrong their companions will not boast, the destruction of sinners comes suddenly.

[7] You lazy ones, think: you will perish, and your money will perish with you. Though your silver and gold abound, they shall rust.

[8] If you birth many children, they shall be for many graves; if you build many houses, they shall be demolished.

[10] Whether in a house or a forest, in the wilderness or a pasture, in the vineyard or the grain floor—it will not be found.

[11] Because you did not keep the Lord's Command, He will not save you or your household from tribulation. Sadness shall come upon you from all your enemies, and you will not find joy in the children born of your nature.

[12] But from His abundance, He will not trouble those who kept His Order and Law. He gives to all who ask Him, and He blesses their children and the fruit of their land.

[13] He makes them rulers over the peoples in their area so they might rule rather than be ruled; He gives them His plenty in their pasture.

[14] He blesses all they take in their hands—the field fruit and the livestock—and He makes them joyful in their children.

[15] He does not diminish their livestock; He saves them from all tribulation, weariness, illness, and destruction—from the enemies they do not know and those they do.

[16] He will advocate for them in the time of Judgment and save them from evil and tribulation. In the first era, if a priest lived who performed the work of the Tent, kept the Law, and lived in the Lord's Will, the people would give him the tithe and the firstborn of man and livestock; and the Lord would save them from all tribulation.

[17] As Moses commanded Joshua, son of Nun, there were cities of sanctuary in all their land, for those who killed by accident or intent, until judgment was decided...

[18] If a person killed a soul, he would be measured there so that he might be saved.

[19] He told them, "Examine if there was a previous quarrel. If it was by an axe, a stone, or wood that fell from his hand unknowingly—if he says, 'That person died by accident'—examine and save him. If it was unintentional, let him be saved.

[20] But if he did it knowingly, he will receive hardship for his sin, and no one will pardon him. If it was unintentional, examine and save him so he does not die."

[21] He worked for them so they might distance themselves from sin; Moses worked like this for the children of Israel so they would not depart from the Lord's Law.

[22] He commanded the children of Adam to live firmly in the Lord's Command: to abstain from worshipping idols, eating what is found dead, and eating what is strangled or cut by a sword. They were to distance themselves from all evil work so they might distance themselves from all that is improper.

[23] He commanded them not to depart from the Command He established in the pattern of the Tent in Heaven, so they might save their bodies and find a dwelling with their fathers.

[24] As they were born of Seth and Adam, who did the Will of the Lord, those who believe in the Lord’s Word and live in His Command will be called the children of the righteous.

[25] As we are Adam's children, and as He created us in His Image and Appearance to do good works that please the Lord, He will not reject us.

[26] He will not separate His friends. If we do good works, we shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, where welfare is found with those who do good.

[27] He loves those who ask Him with a clean heart; He hears them in their prayer and accepts the repentance of those who are disciplined. He gives strength and power to those who keep His Order, Law, and Command.

[28] Those who did His Will shall be joyful with Him in His Kingdom forever; whether they preceded us or come after, they will offer praise to Him from today until eternity.